Channel Nine, Harmony
Alliance, KCP&L, the
Anti-Defamation League,
McDonald's, and IBM present
Dancing In Moccasins.
When it comes to this country's
1.5 million American
Indians, there is a mystique, a
sense of intrigue, a shroud
of mystery that is
unlike the aura
surrounding any other minority.
They have lived and maintained
a sense of pride and dignity,
despite a history of near
annihilation, the humility of
being stereotyped, and the
agony of being forced to
accept a value system which
is not their own.
Tonight, you can meet some of
these people, find out where
they get their resilience,
as we look at people
who Dance in Moccasins.
I know every one of those songs
that is rendered belongs
to a very important person.
And with that, I dance with
respect to every song.
It makes you real happy and
proud that you're an Indian.
Used to be a long time, they
used to fight one another.
Now different tribes, now
they get together
and pow-wow and celebrate.
To understand why they
celebrate, you have to look
into their past to see who they
are, where they've been.
To see what it's like dancing
in moccasins.
Each nation has a different
story, but you might find that
collectively, they celebrate the
preservation of a way of
life as much as life itself.
To make sense of that, we went
to the Kickapoo Reservation to
talk to Paul Guiseppe, a tribal
elder who is well
respected because he
has seen a lot.
At one time, this whole
continent, the United States,
was our country.
It was taken away from us.
We was forced to go on.
Like my people, they had come
from round the Great Lakes.
And when we were one nation, one
tongue called Algonquin.
The land that was their
livelihood.
Their's is and was an ecological
approach to life,
designed to bring man in
harmony with nature.
In one person's words,
the earth is
alive, a living organism.
Streams of water are her blood,
the rocks her skeleton,
the winds her breath, the
topsoil her skin.
And the Indians felt if treated
right, it would take
care of them.
We had the game, and everything
was here.
They called it The Paradise,
until the white man came and
expansion got underway.
I've been told by my elders
what they've done to them,
it's not in history.
Them things are not
in the history.
But today I think about it.
I don't even like to
talk about it.
You don't have to be Kickapoo
to understand.
This country is built on
aggression, wars, fight,
battles, and they even gave
it a name, massacres.
The Kickapoo stemmed
from the Algonquin
the Great Lakes region.
Forced to move from that area,
they and the Pottawatomie, a
neighboring tribe, were pushed
to Wisconsin, Illinois,
Indiana, and Missouri.
As they fought to maintain their
place in nature amid a
disappearing forest, leveled by
white settlers who wanted
land for farming and
agriculture.
My people was from the start,
from the beginning, were
peaceful people.
They would not kill anyone.
But as they were pushed and
pushed, it made them angry,
mad, and they were the
warlords of this
country at one time.
And then the white man
called us savage.
He's the one's that's savage.
He invaded this country.
He discovered but he invaded
it, took over the whole
country today, put us on what
they call reservation.
To tell you the fact of it is,
these reservations are
something like Fort
Leavenworth.
Outgunned, outnumbered, and
facing a diminishing food
supply, within an 18 year period
the Indians lost 48
million acres of the land
they called home.
They just kept pushing them
and forcing them.
In 1940, the Kickapoo came to
Kansas with a government
promise that they could stay on
768,000 acres of land, as
long as the tribe remained
a tribe.
That treaty was broken.
Eight years later, their
land was reduced.
All but 150,000 acres was sold
to the US government
for $0.49 an acre.
In 1877, the land base became
even smaller as the government
forced the tribe to split
its property among
individuals of the tribe.
The chief got 320 acres, the
head of each household got 160
acres, and everyone
else received 40.
The rest was sold to Pike's
Peak Railroad
for $1.25 an acre.
But it isn't the loss of
land that hurts most.
I didn't like the way they
treated my people.
They treated them like dogs and
cattle, or herd of cattle.
The old couldn't make the trips,
well the government
soldiers shot them.
Shot the old people and the
ladies that had babies
carrying them, they shot them
like people and they just--
I don't know.
I really hate to
talk about it.
It makes me mad in my
mind and my heart.
Estimates show battles between
white settlers and other
Indians killed off 2/3 of the
Kickapoo and the Pottawatomie
between the 18th and
20th centuries.
And even worse, the
tribe split.
Some moved to Oklahoma, others
eventually went to Mexico.
All of them faced hard times.
The Europeans thought
of them as savages.
And in addition to taking their
land, they wanted to
civilize the Indians, make
them more American.
Children were the target,
and religion and
education their methods.
I got it from the adults, the
teachers that the Indian was a
backward way, was paganistic,
all negative
kinds of, to me, thoughts.
So I tried to block them out of
my mind, and tried to pick
up what it was they were
trying to teach me.
And so I made good grades,
because that was--
I guess I always thought
education was my
only way out of here.
I know my parents sacrificed a
lot for us to go to school.
Dwindling government funding for
schools on reservations,
and increased money for off
reservation boarding schools
pushed many Pottawatomie and
Kickapoo young people out of
their closely knit tribal and
family life and into the
boarding schools of places
like Lawrence, Kansas and
Genoa, Nebraska.
There the children were lined
up, scrubbed, given an
American name, a haircut, and
a uniform, and told to leave
their Indian culture behind.
A lot of cases, a lot of tribes
became extinct because
they lost their language.
They began to lose
their culture.
Everyone learned the three Rs.
Women learned to sew and cook.
And men learned the trades of
blacksmiths and carpenters.
There are stories of beatings
for those who
tried to run away.
Those who stayed were forced
to accept Christianity, but
many held tight to
Indian ways.
There was nothing
like my home.
I wanted to hear the voice and
the language and the drum and
the gourd, or whatever it
might what we used.
I miss those things.
In the Kickapoo faith, it is
Wisaka that created the world
and named everything in it.
He made the Kickapoo, taught
them their way of life, how to
build their houses, and which
materials to use.
He also taught them how to dance
and perform religious
ceremonies, and he
gave them bundles
containing sacred objects.
It was his father, Kechi Muneto,
who created everything
in the universe except
for this world.
And Indian way's a god's
way of worshiping.
It's not man made, it's was All
Mighty, the Supreme Being
who gave it to us.
Some say it is their religion,
their beliefs, their
Indianness that has kept their
culture alive until this date.
When we come back, we will
travel to reservations around
the country to see what life is
like today, as we look at
some of the people who are still
Dancing in Moccasins.
It is 1989, and this is
the rugged desert of
Northeastern Arizona.
It's the kind of place
most people shun.
At the same time, it's the kind
of place many American
Indians dream about, a place
that offers the ability to
live off the land and be
in harmony with nature.
But there is an underlying
nightmare created by what the
Indians see as the white
man, the US government.
Like you can't sleep, you
can't eat, and all that.
You just got to think about what
they're going to do next.
16 years ago, Congress divided
2 million acres of land among
the Hopi and Navajo living
in that area.
But when the boundary lines
were drawn, little if any
consideration was given to
people staying on the land.
We feel that the United States
government has not recognized
the human rights, the human
dignity of these people that
are facing relocation.
The government is forcing
each tribe to relocate
into its own territory.
This is not my law.
The Indians object, and they are
protesting loud and long,
but peacefully.
The Navajo do not
want to move.
It would mean leaving their
homeland and Big Mountain, a
place that is sacred to them,
because many of their
ancestors are buried there.
This is a territorial battle,
one many American Indians know
about firsthand because of bouts
on their reservations.
Some old enough to know say
it is reminiscent of what
happened more than
a century ago.
In the Dairy State, during the
predawn hours, it's against
the peaceful backdrop of just
about any upper Wisconsin lake
that you find protests
every year.
These are townspeople protesting
against a treaty
that allows the Chippewa Indians
to spear fish year
round, and bring in as much as
they can catch, as long as
they don't interfere with
nature's replenishing process.
Police are taking us in for
crossing a line in a public
boat dock, because there are
some Indians spearing up here
that have more rights
than anybody else
in the United States.
The Indians say they
deserve to go.
I blame the governor for not
getting rid of these people in
the exercise, the legitimate
exercise of
the Chippewa's rights.
This is condoning, inciting
violence, and you're virtually
sitting on a powder keg.
Spear fishing is the livelihood
of the Chippewa.
It's their main source
of food.
The catch is spread among people
of the reservation.
Protesters in cold weather
made the 1989 bounty fall
short of the goal of 48,000
fish, only 16,000
were brought in.
It's a small percentage of the
lake's yield, yet protesters
lined the docks.
They're afraid the Indians
will deplete the fish
population and send tourists
elsewhere.
So they chant.
Goodbye Hopi, goodbye Hopi.
And they sing.
[SINGING]
Land where my fathers died, land
of the pilgrim's pride.
Ironically, it's a song the
Indians could sing too,
because it's freedom
they want.
At the foothills of the Smokies
on the Cherokee
Reservation in North Carolina,
it's higher paying jobs the
American Indians there want.
According to non-Indian
standards, they are among the
most developed nations, with
elected officials, law
enforcement, a fire department,
and medical
facilities.
They exist as a sovereign
nation, but their livelihood
depends on the money of tourists
passing through the
reservation .
There is some light industry
on the reservation.
A moccasin factory supplies
shops with souvenirs, and
people with jobs.
Well, it's just a job.
Jobs are so hard nowadays,
you have to hang
on to what you get.
But still, it isn't enough
for the young.
I plan on getting away
from here soon.
Move to some money
making area.
The most recent census figures
show there are 278 Indian
reservations located within the
United States, each with
their own problems.
Anthropologists say the
Kickapoo Reservation near Kansas
City is probably one of
the most typical.
Here at the Kickapoo
Reservation, the fight today
is for jobs.
Many of the young people have
to leave the area because of
the lack of employment, and the
need for more development.
US government budget cuts have
left broken windows and
boarded businesses scattered
throughout the reservation.
But a seven member tribal
council the Kickapoo elected
to govern its people is
working for change.
Tribal manager Fred
Thomas says,
it's a matter of survival.
Because of the present trend by
the federal government, I
see the tribe being pressured
to enter into agreement with
the state of Kansas
or program funds.
And if that would happen, I
don't think the reservation
would exist under state law.
To no avail, this sign
has stood for nine
years looking for help.
The Kickapoo want to
be self sufficient.
We wouldn't say no to anything
that wants to come in.
I think we'd look at it, and
right now we're looking at
employment for the people, and
if we can help them out, then
we help ourselves.
It was a drive for independence
10 years ago
under the Self Determination
Act that the Kickapoo built
this water treatment plant,
which employs two people.
The $1.5 million facility is
one of their most prized
possession.
It pumps water from the Delaware
River into the
reservation.
Many Indian tribes have an
agreement or a situation with
nearby communities or municipal
operations where the
water is piped in.
But we wanted the responsibility
and the right
to take care of our
own water needs.
They had to fight the state of
Kansas to get that right, and
they used an 1854
treaty to do so.
The court decision said the
Kickapoo were there before
Kansas was a state, and it
gave them legal power
to build the dam.
That was just the beginning.
I think that what has happened
in these later years is we've
had our Kickapoo people who
have learned, who got an
education and got some know
how to operate and develop
programs, community
development.
And we got into a real
initiative, a real drive for
self determination.
That drive has led the effort to
build and acquire land for
the Kickapoo Nation Farm, which
employs five people, and
houses eight buffalo and more
than 200 head of cattle.
The 3,000 acre facility
represents just about all of
the land the tribe now owns.
Individual Indians have an
additional 3,000 acres on the
19,200 acre reservation.
The rest has been sold
to non-Indians.
It also led to the purchase of
heavy equipment used in both
road and building
construction.
Buck Joaquinas does the road
work, and he's the tribal
construction foreman.
He has a four man crew.
The bingo hall was
built in 1984.
During the week the place sits
idle, but Saturday through
Monday, the place is open to
the public, and the high
stakes draw a crowd large
enough to put
seven people to work.
The bingo hall, the farm, and
the trading post are major
employers and sources of income
on the reservation.
The gas station slash
convenience store
was built in 1977.
It closed six years later, but
was reopened in 1985 and, when
we were there, there was talk
of expansion, turning the
building next door into
a tire center.
Mike Mattwaoshe, the manager
of the store,
would run the place.
The important thing that we
need right now is jobs out
here, and that will supply
at least two more jobs
for people out here.
That's the whole idea of trying
to get jobs, so we can
more or less progress further
than where we
are at right now.
The senior citizens home is a
meeting place for those who've
been around the longest and seen
the most. They've watched
people come and go.
The Census Bureau says close
to 300 live on the
reservation.
The Kickapoo say there's
twice that many.
Regardless of the number, just
about everyone maintains
images of what once was
and what can be.
I don't know, we all
have their own
tribal pride, I guess.
They talk in terms of
a brighter future.
Gwen McKinney wants a silk
screen business.
It's difficult, because
I've got no
money and I'm not working.
But I'm going to the Bureau to
try to get some assistance
from them, so that I can
start on a small scale.
And then as I go, expand.
Charlie Holman moved to the
reservation with his
wife four years ago.
She works in health services.
He wishes others were
that lucky.
I think that's the primary
interest, is to increase the
standard of living.
And if we had local jobs, I
think these people here would
probably really enjoy that,
because it'd give them
something to do.
The people here know they have
a roof over their heads, food
on the table, and
companionship.
And they say that's enough
to keep them here.
To them, it is home.
They can worship as they
please, perform their
religious ceremonies, and
be as one with nature.
People who've lived on the
reservation say they have more
than a lot of people.
There's a few people I feel
like they may be poor in
material things, but in their
frame of mind, how they think,
to me they're rich.
But there's more people who
don't feel good about
themselves, don't know
what they want or
where they're going.
And there's too many of them.
Starting with the young in
school, they're trying to cut
that number.
The Kickapoo Indian School is
attended by about half the
students on the reservation.
The others go to either boarding
or public schools.
Those at the Indian School say
students there receive an
education more sensitive to
their needs, through what's
called the circle of learning.
I feel like it's very important
with self concept of
any children, and particularly
with Indian children, that we
need to emphasize their
importance and the strength
that they give to being
included in
an educational circle.
That their ideas are as
important as anyone else's in
that circle.
Indian culture is also fostered
through teacher aides
of Indian descent.
Virginia Potts here was our
resource person to help with
our K-12 project in art.
And she's the one that was
responsible for teaching the
moccasin making.
This is the high school level,
this over here at the grade
school level.
She also helped with the
beading, and we also had two
other beading people in.
She says she helped so the
craft would not be lost.
I just want them to learn, to
carry that on, so they could
pass it on to the next
generations, maybe generations
after the generations.
And if not, who's going
to tell them?
14 of the 16 teachers at the
school are not Indian, and
they say the aid program
is a must.
It's hard I think for us to
understand a lot of it.
To understand a lot of?
The culture and the heritage,
because I don't
know much about it.
She and other teachers help the
students learn every day
life skills, and the subjects
taught in public schools.
The school is funded and
monitored by the Bureau of
Indian Affairs.
Tests of sixth graders show they
are performing just below
grade level in all subjects
checked, except spelling,
where they're well
above the norm.
And unlike the students of
many reservations, the
Kickapoo do continue
their education.
A self study report
says most go on to
college or a trade school.
Those who go to college
have to work harder
according to teachers.
There needs to be more
discipline stressed, I think.
They have a lot of trouble with
dealing with homework and
skills of that nature, and that
needs to be stressed.
Because in college, you're
on your own.
Because there are only 40 jobs
on the reservation, most do
leave, and there is
concern about them
losing their heritage.
But some say there is a force
that brings them back.
When we continue, we will go to
the city to meet some urban
Indians who Dance
in Moccasins.
At a distance, it looks fine.
But what if you decide
to move in?
Imagine coming to a
city, any city.
You have no ID, you can't drive,
you know nothing about
catching a bus or
using a phone.
It can be frightening.
And that's the case for many
American Indians who leave
reservations.
Fears are felt even in a town
the size of Lawrence.
A nurse who works at the Health
Services Department of
Haskell Indian Junior College
knows all too well.
She left the Kickapoo
Reservation
seeking a better life.
One of the big things that I
noticed when I moved off the
reservation to go to college,
everybody there
seemed to have a phone.
I never had a phone.
I never could afford one.
They say, what's your
phone number?
I say, I don't have one.
She found adjusting to
a new culture, a new
society, is not easy.
65% of the American Indians
make the attempt, and it
doesn't take long for many who
thought it would be a smooth
transition to think again.
Indians are not filtered
into society.
They're just rushed into it,
they're just forced into it.
And a KU professor who has
studied them says, they often
find dealing with that pressure
does not provide the
life they dreamed of.
Many American Indians live
below the poverty line.
And I believe the statistics
were Indians not on
reservations, 22% of them fell
below the poverty line, as
compared to 12% of the US
population in general.
And that increased to 40%
for American Indians on
reservations,
The culture shock and the
disappointment are often too
much to take.
And a large number, nearly twice
as high as that of the
general population, choose
suicide as a way out.
Jeanette Biggoose says it was a
feeling of hopelessness that
nearly did her in.
I thought of giving my children
up, that somebody
raise them that could
afford them.
But that wasn't what I wanted.
So I thought of taking
my life.
But I couldn't leave them, and
I couldn't justify taking
their lives.
So the only thing I had to
do was I went to church.
I was raised Catholic,
and I tried to go
back to Catholic church.
Somehow I just couldn't find
the comfort that I needed.
So as a last resort, and it was
from my thinking, that I
would go back and pray
with my parents.
And I came out, so I went
to church with them.
And I came out.
I was able to laugh, think
of the future.
Making adjustments, she was able
to achieve what came more
easily to others.
As a nurse, she now helps those
dealing with everything
from alcoholism to diabetes,
a disease some say is at
epidemic proportions among
American Indians.
Her insight is important.
If you want to heal your spirit,
you go to church.
In the Western thinking, if you
want to heal your body, go
see a doctor.
But amongst the Indians, it's
hard to separate them.
The difficulties in the approach
to medicine cross
over into other aspects
of life.
In a white man's world, you go
90 miles an hour, and achieve
the highest and be the status.
The ego takes you beyond
whom you are.
The ego says fight and
excel and beat the
other guy and do better.
For some, the cement, bricks,
mortar, and fast pace of the
city are too much.
To them, the city is simply
a place to work.
That's why I'm here.
I have a job here, and I try
to maintain my ties,
traditional ties and things
like that, by going home.
But others make the
move permanently.
I wouldn't want to go
back to reservation.
No.
Unless something really
bad come up.
And the worst thing that could
have happened to me that would
have made me go back was my
mother and father, and they
died and I didn't go home.
Such a commitment has its
dangers, according to those
raised by the tribal elders.
If you're gone, don't
be gone too long.
Because once you leave, your
children's going to lose a
little bit.
And once your children lose
a little more, the next
generation will lose a lot
more, And by the fifth
generation, this family here in
that generation do not want
to be Indians.
Right now, Indians seem to have
to make a choice between
the city and their culture.
Kansas City has a crying
need for a
cultural center for Indians.
A place that Indians can
practice their culture and
spirituality, and
identify with--
not just for emergency
assistance and poverty, but a
place where they can tell the
people of the city who they
are, and a rallying point.
They are a courageous people.
They have to be to survive.
Real typical in that
I have diabetes.
Alcoholism runs rampant
in our family.
I went to boarding school, which
a lot of people in my
generation did.
A lot of them are going to
college and getting married
and having kids.
So I really feel typical, I'm
not saying I'm not no
Superwoman, I'm a survivor.
When we come back, we will meet
the next generation of
urban Indians.
They too are survivors.
Each has chosen their own path,
their own way of dancing
in moccasins.
The city is now home to
several generations of
American Indians, and some say
regretfully, they can see a
scenario the elders warned
about coming to life.
You let your tradition and
heritage go down the drain,
become a white man.
And the next thing you
know, you don't know
who you belong to.
You don't know who you are.
And we have that problem today
among a lot of the--
not only Native Americans, but
the blacks, hispanics, and the
rest of your generation.
Young people are confused,
according to him.
They have their feet in both
worlds, but don't belong to
either one.
And the Indian culture
is suffering.
When it comes to losing Indian
identity, he could have been
talking about his stepson.
I don't have that
drive that much.
I'm more I guess integrated.
I'm more of a white person
I guess you'd say.
His decision doesn't
bother everyone.
Some say for each person who
abandons their heritage, there
is another who keeps it alive.
In this case, they work
side by side.
Michael Noheart is in search
of his Indian culture.
A social service agency took him
and his sister from their
parents at an early age, and
gave them to a white family
the agency felt could provide
a better life.
As he grew older, Michael
found their cultural
differences were too
much to handle.
Just everything seemed like
it was falling apart.
So I just bailed out real
quick and just left.
Last year he found someone
who understood an
emptiness he was feeling.
She says she had no choice but
to help him find his family.
I said, if you could have
anything in this whole world
you want, what would
you want most?
And he said, a family,
my family.
I'd like to find out who I am
and where I came from, and who
I belong to.
Father's Day the search ended.
Two weeks later, they
were together.
They captured the moment on
videotape, and didn't mind
sharing it.
I'm happy because I
found our family.
We found our family.
And I'm sad and angry because
we were taken away.
And I'm sad and anger
a lot because it
confused me a lot too.
He also helped his sister
develop a sense of Indian
pride she'd never had, because
she was accepted in the
non-Indian world.
They didn't treat me
any different.
I guess in a way,
a lot of times I
wished that I was white.
But I don't anymore.
They chose to keep their life in
the city, although a piece
of their heart will remain
on the reservation.
But they're finding living in
the city is not always easy
for young Indian people.
If you look toward education,
you will find part of the
reason why.
On behalf of the Haskell Indian
Junior College faculty,
staff, and students, I welcome
you to our 1989
commencement exercises.
At a moment when education
is becoming increasingly
important, there is close to
a 75% dropout rate among
American Indians who attend
non-Indian colleges and
universities.
The number is much lower in
Indian schools, but they are
few and far between.
Concord Career Institute is
providing the training Darlene
Lasley needs to make a living.
And I've always wanted to be a
registered nurse, and I think
I will make it.
She says she left the
reservation to become an RN so
she can return and give
reservation Indians the type
of care non-Indians are
unable to provide.
They just don't open up to them
as much as they would an
Indian, another Indian.
In addition to scholastic
problems, young Indians, like
everyone else, are affected
by drug abuse,
alcohol, and teen pregnancy.
The percentage of our babies
that are born to girls 19 or
younger is about one and a half
times what it is for the
whole country.
The birth rate among the native
American girls 19 or
younger is about double what
that birthrate is for the
whole country.
Some have found their niche by
sticking to what the elders
clung to a long time ago.
[CHANTING AND SINGING]
They sing the songs, beat the
drum, and keep the heartbeat
of the American Indian alive.
We're sitting down here trying
to learn our old ways, trying
to recover some of what the
white people tried to take
away from us.
Because in the time of the
1800s, they told us that we
couldn't sing our songs, that we
weren't allowed to practice
our religion.
And the way that I've been
taught is that the
old people are dying.
And the young people, my
generation and the next
generation after us, if we don't
learn these ways from
these old people, they're
going to die.
They say their beliefs are
spiritual, that when God
created the Earth, it didn't
have houses, buildings, and
cars, because the great spirit
didn't intend for people to
seek happiness in
those things.
The only thing we believe
we own is this body.
And if you can't draw the
happiness from inside your
heart here, then you don't
know what happiness is,
because it can't be measured
in any material things.
One of the places you find
American Indians at their best
is at pow-wows.
They call the events a public
relations tool.
They may be, but there's more
than what meets the eye.
They burn in the heart and soul
of many American Indians.
When we return, you can meet
some of them as we go out to
watch them dancing
in moccasins.
The dances and songs and
everything, they're hundreds
of years old usually, and
it means a lot to me.
It makes me feel closer to the
ancestors before me that I
never got a chance to meet.
I hope that people will walk
away with the knowledge, or an
understanding and awareness and
sensitivity to the way the
Native American person,
Indian person thinks.
[DRUMS AND CHANTING]
I'll tell you something
about Indians.
When you make friends to an
Indian, you got you a friend
for the rest of your life.
That's right.
This is a typical Northern
American Indian pow-wow.
It is the coming together of
the past and present, and a
link to the future.
You meet the old friends,
get new friends,
all fellowship like.
I enjoy it more than
I do going to
regular churches myself.
The pow-wow unites the Indians
of two worlds, those of the
city, and those who choose to
build their life elsewhere.
Some are reservation Indians.
And they've lived that way so
long, they just can't adjust
to a civilized world,
you might say.
There is an appreciation for the
problems faced by many of
the people here.
There is a common belief that
alcoholism and other diseases
among Indians is due to the lack
of time to build up the
immunity other cultures enjoy.
Their understanding creates a
climate of understanding.
See, all these people are
my brothers and sisters.
And I respect them and
they respect me.
It is a respect not only for
each other, but also for
tradition that brings
people together.
Most pow-wows are three day
events that start at mid
afternoon with special dances.
The table is open for
all you dancers.
They are called Gourd
Dances, and they are
done to warrior songs.
Out of respect to the drums,
women who are Fancy Dancers
wear their shawls, while
traditional women dancers
carry theirs.
And both groups follow the
men as they move to the
rhythm of the gourd.
There's what's called a
Special Dance for the
drummers, the head dancers
and the head singers.
And those people in turn honor
the people who honored them by
helping to make their
day special in
what's called a giveaway.
At this time, she has
some things that she
would like to giveaway.
She has some people who she'd
like to acknowledge.
Calling our Northern Head Men
Dancer, Lawrence Laflor.
For this lady, the Head Northern
Dancer, it is an
intangible gift that
is most important.
It's the coming together of
Indian people, and them
enjoying themselves and enjoying
each other, that
means a lot to me to see that.
There's also recognition of
those who were unable to
attend the pow-wow.
A lone tee-pee sits across
campus, in this case in
recognition of a student who
died days before the event.
And on the pow-wow grounds, a
dance is done in tribute to
him as well as some others.
We that are living pay homage
to our fallen brothers.
And we also know that there's
a lot of families that have
lost members in different wars,
and that we honor them.
They also feel they
honor the great
spirit with their presence.
This is a special occasion for
all the Native Americans.
There are some who camp out over
the three day stretch in
order to take part.
Trying to get our supper ready
so that we can dance.
And you're left here to cook?
Yes.
Trying to get my fire going,
and my fry bread burning.
Oh no, it's all right.
Those who dance no more
make sure there
are others to follow.
This family drove 23 hours on
a Friday night so their four
year old son could dance
and gain the
respect of the elders.
Following his dance around the
arena, they drove 23 hours to
return to New Mexico for
work on Monday morning.
All that day is a vacation,
an initiation of
dancing, fancy dancing.
And I hope in the future, he
will want to come here and be
able to remember what
happened here today.
Swift Eagle.
To the viewing audience, perhaps
the most spectacular
part of the pow-wow comes
up as the sun goes down.
It is the Grand Entry, led by
the American flag, the state
flag, an Indian flag, and
the Indian staff.
Everyone is dressed in
their native regalia.
You used to be able to tell
each Indian nation by the
colors worn.
Because of intermarriage and
loss of tradition, that's not
the case anymore.
But the reflection of the
rainbow, the imitation of
nature is still important.
Feathers worn are from
birds of prey.
The most prestigious is
the eagle feather.
Legally it can only be
owned by Indians.
Traditionally, it must
be earned by
good or heroic deeds.
This part of the pow-wow, the
sector following the Grand
Entry, is what's known as the
preliminary phase of the
contemporary pow-wow.
It sets the stage for
what's to follow.
The dancers get warmed up and
ready for their call.
Charles Tebow, please come to
the speaker stand, Charles
Tebow
Some say it's even later, when
the lights come that the real
dancing begins.
It is contest dancing, where
people circle the drummers,
moving to warrior songs,
competing for anything from
$50 to thousands of dollars.
That is how a number of American
Indians earn their
living, traveling from pow-wow
to pow-wow, sharing their
expertise of traditional
dances.
The prize money and contest
dancing are also one of the
most controversial aspects.
Some traditional Indians
consider this to be too
commercial, too much variation
from tradition.
But those who choose to take
part say their efforts are
sanctioned by the
Indian people.
And if that weren't so, the
pow-wow would not continue to
exist. And they say there's
one other thing
that keeps it going.
The most important person is
observing us and looking at
us, and that's Almighty God.
And if the dancing and singing
in good spirit,
he's going to smile.
He says that smile kept the
Indian people alive in the
past, and it helps
them presently.
And as long as it remains, there
will be Indian people,
people of tradition, people
dancing in moccasins.
[DRUMS AND CHANTING]
American Indians who choose
to move to the
city do get some help.
One third of those who come
into a seven county area
surrounding Kansas City go
through the Heart of America
Indian Center.
But the Center itself
is in trouble.
Government budget cuts have
limited its resources, and
it's being forced to move
because the property it's on
is being sold.
The city has offered a new
location, provided the Heart
of American Indian Center
officials can get funding for
a new building.
Some say it is a task that
is insurmountable.
But challenges of that nature
are not unusual for people
dancing in moccasins.
To learn more about American
Indians, you can visit your
local libraries, or contact the
Bureau of Indian Affairs.
The proceeding program, Dancing
in Moccasins, was
brought to you by Channel Nine,
Harmony Alliance, KCP&L,
The Anti-Defamation League,
McDonald's, and IBM.